- (array)
    - (object)
        - id: 1,
        - title: How Entrepreneurs Self-Sabotage Product/Market Fit?,
        - slug": how-entrepreneurs-self-sabotage-product-Market-fit,
        - featuredImage: /static/media/Bitmap.jpg,
        - writer: Aaron Epsteins,
        - category: Business,
        - date: 24.12.2019,
        - content: <p>Product/Market Fit (PMF) has become the holy grail for entrepreneurs.</p> <p>Marc Andreessen said, “…the life of any startup can be divided into two parts – before product/market fit and after product/market fit.” It can be an elusive milestone, without which a startup stands little chance of success.</p> <p>In fact, the top two reasons startups fail are not finding PMF and running out of cash on that way.</p> <p>Andreessen says everything is on the table in the hunt for PMF, “Do whatever is required to get to product/market fit. Including changing out people, rewriting your product, moving into a different market, telling customers no when you don’t want to, telling customers yes when you don’t want to, raising that fourth round of highly dilutive venture capital — whatever is required.”</p> <p>The struggle to reach PMF is often clouded by a measure self-delusion that hijacks an entrepreneur’s objectivity. Desperately wanting their idea to work the entrepreneur becomes attached to faulty assumptions, never stopping to deeply question why people want their product, if they are in the right market, or if they are solving a big enough problem.</p> <h1>What is PMF Exactly?</h1> <p>While definitions vary, Eric Ries defines PMF as “the moment when a startup finally finds a widespread set of customers that the product resonates with.”</p> <p>Andreessen says PMF is “the only thing that matters” and that companies should strive obsessively to achieve it until they do.</p> <p>Getting to PMF is generally a slow, laborious process. It not linear — it’s a labyrinth where you spend most of your time lost, never sure if you’re on the right path or just eliminating theory after theory through invalidation.</p> <p>Companies often go through many, many iterations before they find PMF, if they ever do.</p> <p>Adding to this pressure is TTPMF (Time to Product/Market Fit). If you can’t establish PMF within the first 1-2 years of your company’s existence, you generally run out of money or your team falls apart.</p> <h1>The Process of Achieving PMF</h1> <p>PMF is established by running series of build-measure-learn iterations.</p> <p>The goal of this iterative process is proving your value hypothesis of why a customer will pay money to use your product. Start with a hypothesis, test it, validate usage, validate revenue, determine PMF or further iterate on the value hypothesis.</p> <p>Andy Rachleff says you “often stumble into your product/market fit. Serendipity plays a role in finding product/market fit but the process to get to serendipity is an incredibly consistent process.”</p> <p>Rachleff observes that “First you need to define and test your value hypothesis. And then only once proven do you move on to your growth hypothesis.”</p> <h1>Beware of Self-Sabotage</h1> <p>Reaching PMF is a highly analytical and mechanical process, yet our brains tend to work against us, hijacking logic in favor more comforting fantasies about the outstanding value of our product, size of our market, path to revenue, and so on. While self-delusion is part of our natural psychological defense system, it restricts our ability to pursue PMF with a high level of objectivity and discipline and can sabotage our efforts.</p> <h1>Mental Check #1: Am I truly listening to feedback?</h1> <p>Customer feedback is often cold and callous, wounding the fragile ego of the entrepreneur. You are going to hear a lot more bad news than good news, encounter more confusion than clarity, and wrestle with more demons than angels. It’s an inescapable part of the process.</p> <p>It is easy to fall into the reassurances of confirmation bias – the tendency to seek out information that matches what you already believe. It is easy to surround yourself with yes men and enthusiasts that co-sign your optimism and delusions. Harsh criticism will serve you more than flattery, you just need to be in a mental position to truly listen.</p> <h1>Mental Check #2: Is my ego running the show?</h1> <p>The number one problem I’ve seen for startups, is they don’t actually have product/market fit, when they think they do.” Alex Schultz</p> <p>While often well intentioned, entrepreneurs can fall deeply in love with their initial concept, never wanting to hear their baby is ugly. Many founders seem to believe that they have developed the technological equivalent of magic beans and work feverishly to convince everyone they are right, shying away from the reality of valid feedback. While hubris is part of the entrepreneurial DNA, humility and skepticism are generally your best companions on the path to PMF.</p> <h1>Mental Check #3: Are we ready to scale?</h1> <p>One of the most common ways that startups die is “premature scaling.” As an entrepreneur there’s always the temptation to grow the company at the first signs of product traction.</p> <p>Spending significant amounts of money on growth before discovering true PMF is a great way to burn through your cash and shorten your runway. In general, hiring before you get PMF actually hinders your chances of finding PMF.</p> <p>Startups need 2-3 times longer to validate their market than most founders expect. There is a lot of pressure to establish PMF and move on to scaling revenue. Keep an eye on your overconfidence bias and stick to the process.</p> <h1>Mental Check #4: Am I overengineering my product?</h1> <p>At first, build what is needed to create enough utility for your customer to validate your product’s value. Andreessen says that “The product doesn’t need to be great; it just has to basically work.”</p> <p>There is no value in overengineering something that customers don’t want to buy. Avoid the temptation to incur more technical debt by adding feature after features when you should be focused on the business. Don’t delude yourself into thinking you can dream up new features to create demand. Keep your solution lean and malleable on the road to PMF while allowing the market to guide product direction.</p> <h1>Conclusion</h1> <p>PMF is not a magic elixir. It’s a significant milestone that greatly improves (yet doesn’t guarantee) your odds of success. Once your company has PMF it still must find a sustainable growth model, moat off competitors, and maintain a healthy balance sheet. PMF does help prevent your company from investing capital in inorganic and unnatural growth. As you pursue the holy grail of PMF, work to maintain objectively and integrity and save self-delusion for your favorite sports team.</p>
    - (object)
        - id: 1